---
title: Modern Indian History  UPSC

head:
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: 1931-1935
  - - meta
    - name: keywords
      content: round table conference, communal  award, goi act 1935, government of india act 1935, 1935, simon commission, bardoli satyagarha, civil disobedience, world war, world war, lucknow pact, montagu-chelmsford, champaran satyagraha, satyagraha, civils services, general studies, modern history, modern india
---

<div  font-serif      text-base	 text-justify font-medium hyphens-none leading-normal    tracking-wide subpixel-antialiased>


### English and the Mughals
:::details Internal Developments of the Company
- Between 1615 and 1686, the company grew from strength to strength. 
- In 1625, the Governors and Directors of the company were given judicial powers. 
- In 1661, the company was empowered to send ships of war with men and ammunition for the safety of its possessions overseas. In 1683, it got full powers to declare war and make peace, to raise and maintain an army. As early as the 1680s, the Company had plans to secure English dominion in India and was determined to make Indians pay for the conquest of their own country. On several occasions, the Court of Directors wrote to the Company authorities advising them to adopt such a civil and military policy that would secure a large revenue and enable the English to maintain their force and make English a nation in India.
:::
:::details Aurangzeb
- In 1688, hostilities between the English and the Mughal authorities first broke out when the English captured Hugh and declared war on Emperor Aurangzeb. The English had seriously misjudged the situation and underestimated Mughal strength; they were soon defeated and driven out of the factories in Bengal. Realising that they were not yet strong enough to fight the Mughal power, they once again decided to rely on humble entreaties and flattery and get concessions from the Mughal emperor. Aurangzeb too readily pardoned the English for their mistake as he saw that foreign trade benefited Indian artisans and merchants and enriched the state treasury. He therefore permitted them to resume trade on payment of Tl.5 lakh as compensation.
:::

:::details Farrukhsiyar
In 1717, The East India Company succeeded in securing valuable privileges under a royal farman, Farman of 1717, by the Mughal Emperor Farrukhsiyar. It is also described as the Magna Carta of the Company.
The farman was granted because earlier in 1714, William Hamilton, a surgeon in the British East Indian Company had successfully cured Farrukhsiyar of a disease (swelling in the groin). After successful treatment, the Farrukhsiyar finally arranged his marriage to the daughter of Raja Ajit Singh of Jodhpur, which had been delayed by the illness. The farman was instrumental in increasing the Company’s stronghold in Bengal which later **colonised Bengal** followed by the rest of India.
:::

:::details Provisions of the Farman

:::

:::details Farman as Source of Conflict

:::
--- 
## The Danes
:::details Danes
The Danes came from Denmark and they were a minor colonial power to set foot in Indian soil. The Danish East India Company was established in 1616 and they set up trading outposts in 1620 at Tranquebar near Tanjore (Tamil Nadu). In 1755, they founded a colony called Fredricknagore near Serampore in Bengal. Occupied twice by the English, the Danish colony failed as a commercial venture. In 1777, the Danish company went bankrupt and Serampore was transferred to the Danish Crown. However, Serampore became a safe haven for missionaries in India and earned immense fame for the cultural and educational activities of the missionaries. In 1845, Denmark ceded Serampore to Britain, thus ending nearly 150 years of Danish presence in Bengal.
:::


## The French
The French were the last of the European colonial powers to set foot in India. They were also keen on profiting from the Asian trade.
### The French Trading Company (1664)
In 1664, Colbert formed the Companie des Indes Orientales. The French trading company (under the governorship of Colbert) was granted a license by King Louis IV to trade with India and the East Indies.

:::details French Factories
- In 1667, the first French factory was set up at Surat with Francis Caron as its Director General. 
- In 1669, a factory was set up at Masulipatam.
- In 1672, Caron was replaced by Francois Martin who received a village as grant from the King of Bijapur Sher Khan Lodhi and founded it as Pondicherry. Pondicherry later emerged as the French capital in India.
- In 1674, the French also received a site near Calcutta from the ruler of Bengal where they built the town of Chandernagore (1690-92).
- In 1693, the Dutch snatched Pondicherry but it was restored to the French under the Treaty of Reswick. In this way, the French East India Company established its firm base in Chandernagore and Pondicherry.
- The French also acquired control over Islands of Mauritius and Reunion in the Indian Ocean.
- Between 1697 and 1739, the French further consolidated their position by adding several bases including Mahe, Karaikal, Balasore and Kasimbazar.
- The real trouble started when the French won control of Tanjore which the British considered vital for their trade security. 
:::

# Rise of British Supremacy:
Carnatic, Plassey, and Buxar
:::details EIC: FROM TRADING COMPANY TO POLITICAL POWER
- The mid-18th century saw the gradual transformation of the English East India Company from a trading company into a political power. During the period 1600 to 1744, the Company slowly expanded its trade network in India, simultaneously easing out the rivals through a strategy combining diplomacy and war. Though the rise of British supremacy in India is usually traced to 1757 with the British victory in the Battle of Plassey, the ground for the victory was laid in South India where the British might was successfully tested out against the French Company.
:::

:::details ANGLO-FRENCH:THE CARNATIC WARS
 - When the declining Mughal authority and the weak regional powers proved incapable of safeguarding the interests of European Companies in India, they saw the necessity to empower  themselves militarily. Further, they were commercial entities, seeking to maximise their profit margins, which necessitated the elimination of competition and establishment of monopoly. Nay, they not only wanted to monopolise their trade and sell dear, they also wanted to buy their commodities cheap, necessitating acquisition of some political control over the country they traded with. In this context, emergence of hostilities between the English and the French was but natural. South India emerged as the arena of Anglo-French rivalry as it had become the main centre of French activities with Pondicherry as capital. The French had also begun to wield great influence in the neighbouring states of Hyderabad and Mysore. Besides, there was not much scope in western India because of the powerful Marathas, while Eastern India was under the strict control of Alivardi Khan. It was only in Southern India that conditions became favourable, especially after the death of Nizam-ul-Mulk in 1748. Thus, for nearly 20 years from 1744 to 1763, the English and the French remained embroiled in a bitter war in south India, a series of conflicts popularly known as the Carnatic Wars (1740-63).
:::
:::details First Carnatic War (1740-48)
**Austrian War of Succession (1740)**
- The immediate context for conflict between two European rivals in India was provided by the War of Austrian Succession in Europe which broke out in Europe in 1740 between Austria and Prussia. In this war, Britain and France joined opposite camps. Perhaps conscious of their relatively weaker position, the French tried hard to prevent the extension of war to India and Dupleix advised his English counterpart to maintain neutrality. But the English did not agree, instead deliberately adopted aggressive stand and seized some French ships off the south-eastern coast of India. The French had no fleet in India, hence Dupleix (the French Governor General) messaged La Bourdonnais (the French Governor of Mauritius) for reinforcements. La Bourdonnais immediately left with a squadron of 3,000 men towards the Coromandel Coast. As soon as the help arrived, the French attacked the English and captured the British possessions in Fort St George, Madras and other nearby areas (21 September 1746). Included among the prisoners of war was Robert Clive. The First Carnatic War had begun.

**The English Seek Protection from the Nawab of Carnatic, Nawab Anwaruddin**
- Anwaruddin, the Nawab of Carnatic, disapproved of hostilities in his kingdom. Thus, when the English appealed to him for protection, the Nawab asked the French to quit Madras. But the French were now in no mood to retreat and neglected the advice just as the English had done earlier.

**Battle of St. Thomas (or St. Thome, 1746)**
- The Nawab now sent a large army to fight against the French. A large Indian army of 10,000 under Mahfuz Khan met a small French army consisting of 230 Europeans and 700 Indian soldiers under Capt. Paradise on the banks of River Adyar at Mylapore near St. Thomas in 1746. But to everyone’s surprise, a handful of properly trained soldiers of the French army routed Anwaruddin’s vast army. This amply demonstrated the superiority of the European troops and exposed the military weakness of the Indian rulers. Dupleix learnt the lesson that in any quarrel between Indian princes, his disciplined army would be very useful. And in the 18th-century political chaos, there was no dearth of Indian princes who would invite Dupleix’s assistance to turn the scales in their favour. At that time, Indian rulers were not guided by patriotism and did not hesitate in inviting foreigners in settling accounts with their rivals. In this way, it was Dupleix who first showed the way of intervening in disputes of the Indian rulers and thereby acquiring political control—a technique which was later perfected by the English Company.
:::

:::details Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748)
- Even as the French continued the siege, the War of Austrian Succession came to an end by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) on the basis of mutual restitution of conquests. This brought an end to the first round of Anglo-French conflict in India as well. Madras was restored to the English and the French got Louisburg in North America. The first round of conflict had ended in a draw.
:::

:::details Second Carnatic War (1749-54)
- Dynastic feuds in South India provided the context for the second round of Anglo-French conflict in the south. The succession disputes at both Carnatic and Hyderabad provided the French Governor General Dupleix an opportunity to intervene in Indian politics. Flashback: In the 18th century, the Mughal subah (province) of Carnatic came under the authority of Governor of Deccan (Nizam of Hyderabad). But just as in practice the Governor of Deccan had freed himself from the control of the Mughal Emperor, the Deputy Governor or the Nawab of Carnatic, had also established his independent authority. Accordingly, the Nawab Saadatullah Khan of Carnatic, headquartered at Arcot, appointed his nephew Dost Ali as his successor, without the prior approval of his superior, the Nizam. However, in 1740, the Marathas invaded the Carnatic, killed Nawab Dost Ali and took his son-in-law Chanda Sahib as prisoner to Satara. Thereafter, the affairs of the Carnatic deteriorated and this provided an opportunity to the European trading companies to directly interfere in Indian politics.

**Succession Disputes in Carnatic and Hyderabad**
- In 1740, the Marathas had invaded the Carnatic and killed Nawab Dost Ali and took his son-in- law Chanda Sahib as prisoner to Satara. In 1743, the Nizam of Hyderabad felt prompted to come to the Carnatic and appoint Anwaruddin Khan as the Nawab of Carnatic. But in 1748, Chanda Sahib was set free by the Marathas and the same year, Nizam of Hyderabad Nizam-ul-Mulk Asaf  Jah passed away. He was succeeded by his son Nasir Jung but his grandson, Muzaffar Jung laid claim to the throne. Muzaffar Jung now allied with Chanda Sahib to gain their respective seats in Hyderabad and the Carnatic.

**Intervention by Dupleix**
- In this way, Dupleix soon got his opportunity and astounding success awaited his plans. He was able to interfere in the wars of succession that started after the death of Asaf Jah (1748). He pledged French support to Muzaffar Jung and Chanda Sahib. Thus, a tripartite understanding was developed among the French, Chanda Sahib and Muzaffar Jung.

**French Install their Protege, Chanda Sahib, in Carnatic (1749)**
- In August 1749, the three allies ambushed and killed Anwaruddin at the Battle of Ambur, near Vellore. His son Muhammad Ali fled to Trichinopoly and Chanda Sahib became Nawab of Carnatic. He rewarded the French with a grant of 80 villages near Pondicherry. Feeling the extension of French influence, the British decided to support Nasir Jung for the throne of the Nizam and Muhammad Ali for the Nawabship of the Carnatic. Thus, began the second phase of the AngloFrench War, also known as the Second Carnatic War.

**French Install their Protege, Muzaffar Jung, in Hyderabad**
- Soon the French and their allies marched to the Deccan. The French army surprised and killed Nasir Jung and installed French protege Muzaffar Jung as the Nizam of Hyderabad. Muzaffar Jung amply rewarded Dupleix by appointing him honorary governor of all the Mughal Dominions south of the River Krishna. Territories near Pondicherry as well as the famous market town of Masulipatam in Orissa were also ceded to the French. In return, Dupleix placed at the disposal of Muzaffar Jung the services of his best officer— Marquis de Bussy, with a French army. This was also the best way of safeguarding French interests at the Hyderabad court. Dupleix was now at the height of his political power and his dream of an empire now seemed likely to be realized. Soon afterwards, Muzaffar Jung was killed in an accidental skirmish (February 1751). However, Bussy maintained French influence in the Deccan by quickly placing his nominee Salabat Jung on the throne. In this way, Bussy went on to control the political fortunes of the Deccan for seven years and even induced the Nizam to grant him four rich districts on the Coromandel Coast known as the Northern Circars (or Northern Sarkars), comprising Mustafanagar, Ellore, Rajamundry and Chicacole. The French power in south India was now at its height but not far away from its fall.

 **Emergence of Robert Clive**
- Meanwhile, Muhammad Ali (the son of the late Nawab Anwaruddin) had taken refuge in the fortress of Trichinopoly and the repeated attempts of Chanda Sahib and the French to capture the fortress had failed. The British, realising that the situation implied a serious threat to their position in Southern India, now decided to put their entire strength behind Muhammad Ali.
- At this crucial juncture, there appeared a man on the scene endowed with a daring genius, whose intelligence and bravery saved the fortunes of the English. He was a young clerk of the Company, Robert Clive. He suggested that French pressure on Muhammad Ali could be released by attacking Arcot, the capital of Carnatic. Thus, attack upon Arcot was to be used as a diversionary tactic. Chanda Sahib would have to divert an effective part of his army for the protection of Arcot.

**Siege of Arcot (August 1751)**
- Clive’s plan seemed well conceived and once it was approved, Clive stormed Arcot with a small force of only 210 men and captured it (August 1751). The plan had the desired effect and Chanda Sahib, alarmed by the fall of his capital, sent a large portion of his force from Trichinopoly which comprised of 4,000 men to recapture Arcot. Clive successfully sustained the famous siege for 53 days (23 September to 14 November). In the meantime, Clive received help in the form of reinforcements from Madras and some Indian allies (rulers of Mysore, Tanjore and the Marathas). Clive then came out of the besieged town, attacked and defeated Chanda Sahib at several important battles including one fought at Kaveripak. Meanwhile, encouraged by the capture of Arcot, a strong English force led by Stringer Lawrence relieved Trichinopoly following the surrender of French forces (June 1752). Chanda Sahib was treacherously captured and beheaded by the Raja of Travancore. Mohammad Ali then became the undisputed Nawab of the Carnatic. Dupleix’s high hopes were thus dashed to the ground.

**Recall of Dupleix, 1754**
- The French defeat at Trichinopoly sealed the fate of Dupleix. The Directors of the French Company did not appreciate his political ambitions and disproved of the expenses they involved and recalled him. On 1 August 1754, Godeheu succeeded Dupleix as French Governor General in India. Recall of Dupleix proved to be a big blow to the fortunes of the French Company in India.

**Treaty of Pondicherry, 1755**
- In complete reversal to Dupleix’s policy, Godeheu signed a peace treaty, the Treaty of Pondicherry, with the English in 1755. As per this treaty, both the companies agreed not to interfere in the quarrels of the Indian princes. The second round of conflict had also proved inconclusive. Nevertheless, after this treaty, though the French continued to maintain their hold over Hyderabad for some time, they had lost much of their prestige and their predominant position in the Deccan had been definitely undermined. On the other hand, English influence had been established in Carnatic, with their candidate Mohammad Ali installed as the Nawab of Carnatic.
:::

:::details Third Carnatic War (1757-63 AD)

**Context of Seven Years' War, 1756**
- Like the first Carnatic war, even this war was an echo of the hostilities in Europe. In 1756 A.D the Seven Years’ War broke out in Europe. In this War, England and France joined opposite camps which ended the short peace between the European companies in India as well.

**Arrival of Count de Lally (April 1758**
- This time the French Government made a determined effort to oust the English from India. For this purpose, the French sent an impressive French army headed by Count de Lally, who reached India after a long voyage of 12 months in April 1758. By this time, the English had already won the Battle of Plassey and they returned to India with fresh reinforcements of men and material.

**Problems Faced by the French Army**
- Lally started his work vigorously. He attacked Fort St. David and captured it and other small English possessions in this region. But the French victory was only short-lived as problems of varying nature began to surface on the horizon. Lally’s attack on Madras ended in failure as he could not get naval support in time. The French Company also faced shortage of ammunition as well as lack of funds to pay the troops. Lally was rude and overbearing in his conduct with the subordinates, i.e. the Company’s servants of Pondicherry. He held a very low opinion of them and looked down upon them as dishonest rogues to be set right with threats and punishment. In such circumstances, both Lally and his soldiers distrusted each other and the French troops felt badly demoralised. At this critical juncture, rash and headstrong Lally committed another great blunder of prevailing upon Bussy and recalling him from the Nizam’s court, leaving the French army under incompetent commanders. Having assessed the situation, the English sent an army from Bengal to the Northern Circars. They occupied Rajamundry and Masulipatam and also concluded a favourable treaty with Nizam Salabat Jung. French influence in Deccan was thus irrevocably lost.

**Battle of Wandiwash (1760)**
- The battle still continued and Lally was eventually defeated decisively at the Battle of Wandiwash or Vandvasi now in Tamil Nadu (22 January 1760). The English army led by General Eyre Coot totally routed the French army under Lally and Bussy was taken prisoner. Defeated, the French retreated to Pondicherry. But, the English soon laid siege to Pondicherry as well, forcing Lally to ask for help from Nawab Hyder Ali of Mysore. However, due to lack of coordination, the contingent sent by Hyder returned to Mysore without fighting even a single battle. The French capital of Pondicherry finally surrendered on 16 January 1761. The fall of Pondicherry sounded the death knell of French dominions in India. Shortly-thereafter Jinje and Mahe on the Malabar Coast also surrendered to the English, leaving the French without even a toehold in India.

**Peace of Paris, 1763**
- The Third Carnatic War ended officially in 1763 with the conclusion of the Peace of Paris, at the end of the Seven Years’ War. As per the treaty, Pondicherry and some other French settlements were no doubt returned to France, but these were never to be fortified again and could only function as mere trading centres. The worst fate awaited Lally. He was detained as a prisoner of war for two years, after which he was allowed to return to his home country, where, far from receiving any kind treatment, he was first imprisoned and then executed. Thus, the Third Carnatic War brought down the curtain to the Anglo-French rivalry in India and cleared the way for the establishment of the British Empire.
:::

# BRITISH CONQUEST OF BENGAL-PLASSEY TO BUXAR (1757-65)
The beginning of British conquest in India may be traced back to the Battle of Plassey in 1757, in which the English Company’s forces defeated the Nawab of Bengal Siraj-ud-Daulah. In fact, the history of British conquest of Bengal is the history of gradual transfer of power from the Nawabs to the British during the short period of eight years, from 1757 to 1764, the main cause of conflict being the commercial rivalry between the British and the Bengal Nawabs


:::details Backgrounder
-  Since the 17th century, Bengal had emerged as a happy hunting ground of the Dutch, the English and the French Companies who were attracted to Bengal mainly owing to its rich resources.  In 1651, at Hugh, the first English factory was set up upon receiving permission from Sultan Shuja (second son of Emperor Shah Jahan), the subahdar of Bengal.  In 1651 itself, Shuja also granted the English East India Company the privilege of free trade in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa in return for lump sum payment of ^3,000 (350 pounds) at a time when the Company’s exports from Bengal were worth more than 50,000 pounds a year. This was because Sultan Shuja was pleased by the services of one Mr. Boughton, who had successfully cured a royal lady of a disease. Thereafter, English factories sprang up at Kasimbazar, Patna and other places.  In 1698, the English Company obtained the zamindari of the villages of Sutanuti, Kalikata and Gobindapur from Subahdar Azim-us-Shan, on payment of ^1,200 to the  previous proprietors. In 1700, the Bengal factories were placed under Fort William. Soon the villages grew into a city known as Calcutta.  In 1717, Emperor Farrukhsiyar confirmed the trade privileges granted to the Company by earlier subahdars. By early 18th century, exports from Bengal consisted of nearly 60 per cent of the English Company’s imports from Asia, comprising of products such as cotton and silk textiles, handicrafts and raw products such as saltpeter, rice, indigo and pepper.  In 1717 itself, Farrukhsiyar appointed Murshid Quli Khan, the Diwan of Bengal, as Subahdar or Governor (Nizam or Nazim) of Bengal, thus holding the post of Subahdar and Diwan at the same time. Taking advantage of his position, Murshid Quli now declared himself as the Nawab of Bengal and became the first independent Nawab of Bengal.  . In 1740, Alivardi Khan, the Deputy Governor of Bihar, deposed and killed Nawab Sarfaraz Khan grandson of Murshid Quli). Alivardi Khan rightly did not allow fortifications of French and English factories at Chandernagore and Calcutta. In 1756, Alivardi died, nominating his grandson Siraj-ud-Daulah as his successor.
:::

:::details Battle of Plassey (23 June 1757)
The English Company first acquired a foothold in Bengal politics through Plassey conspiracy of 1757 which ended the rule of Siraj-ud-Daulah and inaugurated a new phase of British relations with India. Several developments converged to culminate into the Battle of Plassey which marked the beginning of British conquest of India.

**Siraj-ud-Daulah**
- Siraj’s succession was challenged by two other contenders for the throne, Shaukat Jung (Faujdar of Purnea) and Ghaseti Begum (Alivardi’s daughter). This resulted in intense court factionalism and support was offered to different warring groups by a dominant group in the Nawab’s court comprising Jagat Seth, Umichand (or Amir Chand), Raj Ballabh, Rai Durlabh, Mir Jafar, zamindars and others who were also opposed to Siraj. This seriously destabilised the administration of Bengal and the advantage was taken by English East India Company. Main reasons for conflict between the Nawab of Bengal and the English Company were:  Farman of 1717: In 1717, the Mughal Emperor Farrukhsiyar issued a farman (royal order) granting the British East India Company many trading privileges. This farman became a perpetual source of conflict between the Bengal Nawabs and the English Company. For one, it meant loss of revenue to the Bengal government and second, dastaks were misused by the Company’s servants to evade taxes on their private trade.  Shelter to Krishna Das: The English Company had given shelter to Krishna Das, son of Raj Ballabh, who had fled with immense treasures against the Nawab’s will.  Support to Ghaseti Begum: The Company had also offended the Nawab by giving support to the claims of Ghaseti Begum. 
-  Immediate Cause: The breaking point came when the English Company, anticipating another round of Anglo-French struggle, began to strengthen the fortifications of Fort William and mounted guns on its walls. Siraj pleaded repeatedly with the English to desist from further fortification, but to no avail. Seeing his own authority flouted in his own dominion, Siraj-ud-Daulah decided to launch an offensive.

**Black Hole Tragedy**
- On 15 June 1756, Siraj-ud-Daulah surrounded Fort William and the siege lasted for five days. During this while, Governor Roger Drake and some of his men escaped through the back door down the Hooghly River, took refuge at Fulta near the sea and waited for help from Madras. They left behind 146 persons, including some women and children, under the command of John Zepahnaih Holwell. After the fort fell on 20 June, the Nawab renamed Calcutta as Alinagar, placed it under the charge of Manik Chand, and himself returned to Murshidabad. Subsequently, Holwell and others were imprisoned in a small room of the fort popularly known as Black Hole (18 feet long and 14 feet 10 inches wide) in conditions of excessive heat and crowding owing to summer solstice. It is believed that out of 146 persons imprisoned in that room, only 26 survived the next morning, the rest were probably trampled down by the others for places near the window. The incident came to be known as the ‘Black Hole Tragedy’. The incident was held up as an example of British heroism and Nawab’s callousness. Siraj-udDaulah was portrayed a cruel monster and held directly responsible for the deaths. The English Company used the episode to sway British public opinion and sympathy in favour of the wars of aggression it intended to wage. Meanwhile, help came from Madras in the form of a strong naval force under the command of Robert Clive. Manik Chand, the Nawab’s officer in charge of Fort William, was bribed and he surrendered after a brief pretence of resistance. 

 **Treaty of Alinagar (**February 1757)
- Consequently, in February 1757, the Nawab had to make peace with the English and sign the humiliating Treaty of Alinagar. As per the treaty, the Nawab had to restore to the English their former privileges of trade, grant permission to fortify Calcutta and even pay compensation amount for the losses suffered by the English. In this way, Clive had regained Calcutta and even forced the Nawab to concede to all English demands. Still, the English were not satisfied. They had decided to replace the Nawab with Mir Jafar. With this in mind, they placed an impossible set of demands before the Nawab, thus making a war inevitable. Clive organised a web of intrigue with the leaders in the Nawab’s court. Chief among these were:  Mir Jafar: the Mir Bakshi (Commander-in-Chief of the Nawab’s army)  Manik Chand: the Officer incharge of Calcutta  Amir Chand: a rich merchant  Jagat Seth: the biggest banker of Bengal  Khadim Khan: commanded a large number of the Nawab’s troops  These disaffected nobles of Siraj’s court joined hands with the English to oust Siraj and install
their protege, leading to the Plassey Conspiracy of 1757


**The Battle (23 June 1757)**
- The Battle (23 June 1757) On 23 June 1757, both armies met at Plassey, 30 km south of Murshidabad. The English force comprised of 950 European infantry and 2100 Indian sepoys, while that of the Nawab comprised of 50,000 commanded by the treacherous Mir Jafar. Only a small group of Nawab’s soldiers fought bravely. They were led by Mir Madan and Mohan Lai. After Mir Madan was killed by a stray shot from the English side, Mir Jafar played upon the fears of the Nawab and advised him to retire from the battlefield, leaving the command in the hands of his generals. The trick was well played. Once the Nawab retired with 2,000 horsemen, a large part of the Nawab’s army led by Mir Jafar and Rai Durlabh merely looked on, as Clive routed the rest of Nawab’s forces. As a result, the Nawab had to flee but was captured and put to death by an assassin, Mohammad Ali Beg, on the orders of Mir Jafar’s son, Miran.

**Consequences of Battle of Plassey**

:::





Cornwallis wanted to have the powers of both the Governor-General and the Commander-in-Chief. The new Act conceded this demand as **Governor General was made Commander – in – Chief.**





## The Pitt’s India Act (1784)
:::details The Act of 1786
- In 1786, Pit brought another supplementary bill in the Parliament relating to India to convince Cornwallis to accept the Governor-Generalship in India.
- Cornwallis wanted to have the powers of both the Governor-General and the Commander-in-Chief. The new Act conceded this demand as **Governor General was made Commander – in – Chief.**
  - It resulted in Warren Hastings for the first time enjoying the two positions simultaneously.
  - An effective and authoritarian instrument of control was thus put in place, which continued till 1858 with only little modifications.”
- Governor General was also given **power to override his Council in extraordinary cases** on his own responsibility.
:::

</div>



